Hi, everyone.
Hope you've been having a good day.
Thanks for coming to our session,
and it's the evolution of standards.
I'm very pleased to welcome you
to our panel discussion today,
and that panel discussion is
going to be led by Dave Singer,
who is one of our
standards experts at Apple.
So, Dave?
Thank you very much.
So yes,
welcome to the Evolution of Standards.
This is a moderated panel session.
We're going to go through a few
slides at the beginning and give
you time for questions at the end.
We're going to give you a
rough idea of what's going on,
what's happened recently,
what may be coming up out of
the standards organization.
And I'd like to introduce to you the
distinguished panelists I have here.
So on the left here,
a leading luminary in the
video coding business,
a published author,
and a respected figure
worldwide in video coding,
Barry Haskell of Apple Computer.
It gives me great pleasure and
a small frisson of excitement
to introduce the chair of the
International MPEG Audio Subgroup,
a sage in the audio coding business,
again a leading figure in the
international audio business,
Schuyler Quackenbush.
I'm bringing out the back.
I'll talk a little bit
about system stuff.
We're going to introduce the session.
You ask questions.
We have a lot of fun.
So I'm going to go through
the standards organizations,
at least some of them that you
may have heard of and who they
are roughly and what they do.
Give you a couple of things about
some things that I think are
exciting about what's happened in
systems related standards recently.
A couple of slides on licensing.
Then I'm going to turn it
over to Schuyler who's going
to talk to you about audio,
and then we'll do a
video update at the end.
We will be taking lots
of questions at the end.
And we'll take straightforward
clarification questions
during the sessions.
So if you have a clarification question,
don't hesitate to interrupt.
But if it's a general question,
hold it to the end.
We're going to leave
plenty of time for it.
Unlike what you might expect,
we're going to be frank, honest,
even forthright about questions like,
when will Apple introduce
a particular technology?
Or what legal advice do you
have for this and so on?
In order to save time, however,
I'm going to give you that question now.
The answer is, we don't know.
You might want to save those
questions for some other time.
So the standards organizations,
this is the most boring part,
so you can sleep for a minute, OK?
ISO and ITU, two very big organizations.
ISO has two important working groups
for the QuickTime related people.
Working group one under SC29,
the Joint Photographic Experts Group,
the people who brought you Classic JPEG,
JPEG 2000, and so on.
They're doing lots of exciting work.
I'm not going to talk about it today.
Working group 11,
the Motion Pictures Expert Group,
where we all go to,
they're the people who
brought you MPEG-1,
MPEG-2, MPEG-4,
and MPEG with lots of other
numbers behind it too.
And then the ITU has the
Video Coding Expert Group,
which you've heard about,
which is where the H.264 work started,
for example,
and lots of other H-series codecs.
Cellular telephony – I know that's been
talked about a lot at this session.
There's two really big
organizations there.
They're both partnership projects.
They're partnership projects
between standards organizations,
believe it or not,
mostly national standards organizations.
3GPP sets the standards for
roughly the people who are in the
GSM family of cellular standards,
the ones that started in Europe but
are now basically worldwide.
3GPP2 follows the other track,
the CDMA/CDMA2000
related set of families.
You'll find them both have
open websites in which you
can find a lot of information.
Two more interesting ones:
Society of Motion Picture and
Television Engineers.
They do a lot of the standards work
for production and broadcast and so on.
That's SMPTE.
And you'll find lots of
information on their website.
And finally, those of you who are
interested in streaming,
the standards for
Internet-based streaming,
the protocol specifications and so on,
they come from the
Internet Engineering Task Force,
IETF.
Now, there are also out in that
field industry consortia.
These aren't really
standards organized as such.
These people do collaboration
agreements and so on,
implementation agreements where they
all agree to implement the same thing.
They do a lot of the testing.
Sometimes some of the more
business-related discussions
happen in consortia like this.
So Internet Streaming Media Association,
ISMA,
they do interoperability agreements for
the Internet and for IP-based networks.
Open Mobile Alliance,
they do that for cellular and for
telephony-related high-level functions.
DVB, they do it for digital
video broadcasting,
as their title implies,
mostly based in Europe.
DVD Forum, they're the key people who
talk about shiny disks,
and we had a lot about that
yesterday in the H.264 session.
Finally, the MPEG Industry Forum,
put this one last,
but it's actually a good place to go to.
This is one where they promote
and explain MPEG technologies.
They have a lot of
information on their website.
They tend to keep a lot of news there.
It may be a good place for you to start.
and you'll find lots of links to
other useful places from the MPEG-IF.
So with that,
I'm going to just give you a little
quick update of two things that
I think are really exciting in systems.
Unfortunately,
I know systems is not that exciting.
So I'm going to talk about file format,
and I'm going to talk about file
format simply because it's my baby,
okay?
So you're just going to have
to humor me for one slide.
What's been going on
with the ISO file format?
The ISO file format,
as we told you last year
and the year before,
was adopted into MPEG as the
basis for the MP4 file format.
Then it became the
Motion JPEG file format,
then the 3GPP file format,
and the 3GPP2 file format,
and the SD Video Card Association's
file format.
So you can see that this file format's
going places and really going there.
With the AVC, the H.264 work,
the committee realized that because
the codec itself offered had such a
variety of features and functions,
we could do with better
file format support.
So there's lots of fun stuff in there.
You can group samples together.
So you can do layers.
You can do layering and
sub-sequence selection of an
AVC session in an ISO-based file.
You can get much more dependency
information because the
dependency structure of AVC is
so much more complicated.
We give you clues in the file format,
or at least we enable you to put
clues in the file format so you can
disentangle the dependency information.
There's an amendment underway
which includes those extensions and
actually a lot of other stuff too.
A lot of you have been saying, guys,
the ISO file format approach
to metadata is very weak,
and we knew that.
So we put in a really good
foundation for metadata support
and explicit support for MPEG-7,
but it's also open to storing
other kinds of metadata.
So if you're a metadata-oriented person,
this amendment may be for you.
And then there's support
there for content protection.
So you can do protected,
rights protected DRM content in
the file format in a standard way.
So finally we've got a standard
container format for exchanging
rights protected content,
which is, I think,
a breakthrough in the industry.
An interesting development
going on in 3GPP,
release six is almost done.
There's a terrific amount of
stuff in there for those of you
who follow the cellular world.
This is probably the release that
I think will become the one that becomes
prevalent in the 3G world very rapidly.
Not only does it include the H.264 codec,
which will obviously is a video feature,
but in the systems area,
they finally put content
protection in there,
so we can talk about rights-protected
content in the cellular world.
There's buffer management and
adaptive streaming across the network,
so we can expect better
quality streaming,
better adaptation between the handset and
the server back at the operator's place.
And indeed,
there's RTP retransmission support,
so if a packet does get lost,
despite all the lower layers'
attempts to get it through to you,
there's retransmission
support at that level.
There's also quality of
experience monitoring,
which is going to be interesting.
It's going to enable the
operator to work out,
hey, that sucked for you,
and not charge you so much before
you actually had to call them
and complain that it sucked.
Of course,
they're hoping it won't suck at all.
And then there's multicast
and broadcast support,
so there's lots of opportunities in
business now to send out real-time live
content in a multicast broadcast fashion,
which puts less load on the
network and obviously should
cost less to the end user.
So with that,
I'm just going to give you a
really quick update on licensing.
So we normally do licensing.
Licensing is perfectly ordinary.
There are companies whose job
it is to do basic research and
development and then license it.
And we all appreciate that because
we couldn't get that number of
experts together in the same
place and get the same result,
right?
So licensing is a normal part
of the high-tech business.
It became difficult
over the last few years,
we know,
but we think it's getting easier again.
Almost any successful market
needs an interoperable standard.
You've got to have multiple players
in the market who can interoperate,
providing the different products
that fill out all the niches,
both in terms of function
and in terms of placement,
that are needed to make a market mature.
For multimedia standards,
licensing models have included encoder,
decoder, manufacturing,
and bundling fees,
that's perfectly normal.
You haven't seen them in the past because
they've typically been embedded in the
chips that were put into the products.
So that chip costs a little bit
more because it paid a license.
There have also been
content replication fees,
that's perfectly normal again.
So when you buy a DVD,
there's an amount of money going back
to the rights owner here who developed
the standards for how you make that DVD.
That's how they make their money.
We typically cover a good
chunk of what we can for you.
So you can use the technology
without having to worry too much.
So, the question is, of course, okay,
if Apple's covering a good chunk of it,
do I need a license?
[Transcript missing]
So with that,
I'd like to hand it over to Schuyler,
who's going to give you
an exciting audio update.
Thanks, Dave.
Okay, so I want to begin by reviewing
the MPEG audio standards,
talk about where MPEG has
been and where MPEG is going.
I'd like to begin the timeline
with the compact disc,
1982, which I think kicked off the
whole digital audio revolution.
More than ten years after that,
MPEG standardized MPEG-1, Layer 3,
or MP3.
So that is looking already
like a pretty old guy,
but still holding an important
position in the marketplace.
Several years after that,
MPEG-2 issued Advanced Audio Coading,
and this also exists
in the MPEG-4 standard.
This is arguably the state of the
art in perceptual audio coding.
Several years after that, 2003,
last year, MPEG issued the high
efficiency AAC codec.
This builds on AAC.
We'll talk about how that works.
But in fact,
it uses a different dimension,
exploits a different dimension
to get more compression.
In 2005, next year,
I anticipate MPEG will issue a
standard on lossless audio coding.
So what we see is – I'm giving
you a timeline view here,
but what we see is that
we've got compression,
and then we kind of take
a step backwards and say,
oh, let's do something else.
Let's do compression,
but I want all the bits back.
And then finally,
we're about to begin a new work
item in spatial audio coding.
We're back in the compression business,
but again, we're not just doing a
perceptual audio codec.
We're exploiting a different aspect,
and that actually sounds
stage compression to give you
total bit rate compression.
So here's the timeline of
what MPEG's been doing.
I'm going to stand over here.
And so let me give you
another view of that.
of this.
and look at performance.
So, the top line is the compact disc and
if you look at the right hand side,
I want to look at bits
per channel per second,
which kind of normalizes my whole
rate because we'll see that we're
going to go from two channel to
multi-channel in the course of
looking at the various specifications.
And I reversed the timeline
and we're looking at,
on the right hand column,
bits per channel per second.
So the ALS, the audio lossless coding,
it's at 325 kilobits per second.
That's a lot.
But that's about two to one compression
and you get all the bits back.
So it's bit exact.
I think that number is at
48 kilohertz sampling rate.
It's not a perceptual coder.
It's just compress it mathematically
and give me the bits back,
which is a departure for MPEG.
Now the next line is MP3.
It's the oldest of the MPEG coders.
It's a perceptual audio coder and
it gives you good compression,
not the best.
And typically people, I mean,
I think it should be run at like
80 kilobits per second per channel.
So 160 kilobits for stereo.
A lot of people run at 128.
A lot of people run at 64.
But at 80, it really sounds good.
Now I said the next after that was AAC,
and in effect really sounds good at
64 kilobits per second per channel.
As a matter of fact,
MPEG benchmarked it as an EBU broadcast
quality codec at that rate.
So, as I mentioned before,
MP3 and AAC are perceptual audio coders.
You're getting compression,
and it primarily exploits aspects
of human hearing to shape the coding
noise so that you don't hear it.
Now the next standard
is High Efficiency AAC.
Again,
another slide will show you how it works.
Here we're not just
doing perceptual coding.
In fact, it builds on top of AAC.
And it uses AAC, but then adds a feature
of coding the bandwidth,
so-called bandwidth extension.
It gives you compression by coding
the bandwidth in a clever way.
So, there's shape noise,
bandwidth coding, and in the bottom line,
SC stands for spatial audio coding.
A whole other dimension in
compression by exploiting sound stage
compression in a perceptual way.
So, it is a perceptual coder,
but it's not shape noise.
It's how we perceive a sound stage,
and can we do clever things to
code that in a very compact way?
And the answer is yes.
And so we see that, to recap, MP3,
80 kilobits, AAC, 64 kilobits, HEAC,
a huge leap forward,
24 kilobits per second,
and finally spatial audio coding, 21.
So, we are really marching forward,
but we've had to use
different tricks to get there.
So,
let's talk about what are those tricks.
How does it work?
Okay, now first, I get ahead of myself.
So, those are the MPEG standards.
Where are they in the marketplace?
Are they being used?
So, let's talk about that.
First, MP3, it's everywhere.
I mean, it's old.
It has taken 10 plus years to be
really successful in the marketplace.
So successful,
it's never going to go away.
So, MP3 is hugely proud of
that piece of technology.
AAC,
which I say is definitely one better,
the state of the art.
It's being used by
Apple iTunes and the iPod.
Cool, great.
Real Networks, Rhapsody uses AAC at
a very high bit rate.
They want to really bring
you great digital audio,
so they run at 192 kilobits
per second for stereo.
And, in fact, you will see AAC in a
number of 3G cell phones.
HEAAC, it's the stuff that
makes XM satellite radio.
Satellite radio is what
I call expensive bits.
And you need compression
when bits are expensive.
And so, they can only dedicate like,
[Transcript missing]
Finally, spatial audio coding,
it's a new work item.
It's going to begin at the
next MPEG meeting in July.
I'm very excited about it and
what I think is so great is
that I told you about HEAAC,
48 kilobits per second to my car.
What if you want to do that
and say now it's 5.1 channel?
Well, I think the spatial audio
coding could make that happen.
So,
I think it's a very powerful technology
that I hope will open a lot of markets,
but we're just beginning that.
Now, I'm going to talk about these
technologies and very quickly
give you the 50,000 foot
view of what makes them work.
This is MP3.
A lot of boxes,
just look at the blue boxes.
What you see is the 32-band filter
bank that's common for layers 1,
2, and 3.
Layer 3 follows it by an 18-point MDCT.
The result is a
high-resolution filter bank,
and this is the first
component to get compression.
It's what I call statistical compression.
You need to de-correlate the signal,
and just in a mathematical sense,
you get compression.
The second component is
the perceptual model,
which is up on the left.
This goes one better and says, "Okay,
I see what the mathematical model says,
and statistically speaking,
I can get rid of some bits."
But now the perceptual model says,
"Well, what can you really hear?"
And so based on that model,
it says, "Okay,
it's important to code this.
You don't have to code that at all."
And so it is really driving the
allocation of bits in the whole coder.
And then finally, the blue box,
noisless coding,
is essentially an entropy matching block,
and it's needed to deal with some
mathematical aspects of compression.
And so in a very
first-order approximation,
the filter bank is like a
factor of 2 compression,
the perceptual model about 2.5,
and the lossless coding
another factor of 2.
You get to about a factor of 10 in this
classic perceptual coder framework.
Now, AAC, it's better.
What really happened?
A lot more boxes.
I'm not going to go into that.
But now you've got a
1024-point filter bank,
even higher resolution.
It made a difference.
But
You get the same perceptual model,
the same noiseless coding.
So, in the first approximation,
it's just a cleaner looking
layer three in which you don't
have the two filter banks,
but just one.
Same principles apply.
The classic perceptual audio coder.
Now what is this other
stuff I was talking about?
High efficiency AAC?
Well,
really it's AAC core with something else.
And what you begin is with an encoder
that down samples a signal and just codes
the first half of the bandwidth with AAC.
But it has some side information.
The encoder looks at the
whole thing and it says,
"Hey, can I approximate that upper band
by what I know about the lower
band?" And I send some hints.
And that's the side information.
The answer is yes.
And it works incredibly well.
So in the decoder,
you've got a classic AAC decoder.
You get back the hatch mark here.
And then you essentially
map it up to the high band,
fix it up,
equalize it with the side information,
and you get the wide band.
So the point is,
you got as a foundation the
classic perceptual coder,
but the new dimension is
this bandwidth coding.
We had to use a new idea
to get more compression.
This is one of the new ideas.
Now spatial audio coding is
another case of a new idea.
You have a five-channel signal.
You present it to the encoder,
and the first thing it does
is it mixes it down to,
let's say, two channels,
and encodes it with a classic AAC coder.
[Transcript missing]
why what's new well the answer is
nothing but it's mpeg so if you look at
the mpeg standards there's compression
but nothing lossless and so as i said
before uh you know i'm the i'm the bbc
i save all my programs i got disc farms
that stuff's worth some money i want
to make sure i can read that 20 years
from now and standards provide a kind
of a comfort level where they can say
well the standard won't change i've got
multi-vendor support i'm going with the
standard as opposed to a proprietary
solution where that company maybe
they're going to go out of business so
it doesn't have to be new and better it
can just be standardized and that's the
role that we want to fulfill with this
and i think it's a it's a legitimate one
Okay, I want to give you one demo.
It's AAC versus high efficiency AAC.
And in fact, I'm going to do it at
32 kilobits per second.
I just want to show you
that this is a new thing,
and I think you'll see
that relative to AAC,
there's a remarkable
difference delivered by HEAAC.
So we can go to the demo machine.
Okay, we're not going to go there.
Oh, it's back.
Okay, so 32 kilobits.
I'm going to play AAC.
Can I just say one word?
It's band limited.
I can't do better than that
with this classic architecture.
So let me just bounce
between that and HEAAC.
[Transcript missing]
So I wish I could demo
the spatial coding,
but I don't have five channel here.
But I just wanted to show you that
MPEG has got some new stuff going.
Again, this is at a bit rate which is 32
kilobits per second for stereo.
That's – I would have said that
was ridiculous several years ago.
But it has a place in the marketplace.
It sounds awfully good.
And as I said, XM radio runs that at 48.
But in this room,
32 says – everybody says,
I hear the difference.
So you kind of push the compression.
So you realize what's going on.
But can we have the slides back again?
But I think the answer is
cool – cool technology.
Okay, so I have one more slide,
find out more.
Two URLs, the one is the MPEG homepage,
the second one is the audio homepage.
So I certainly invite you
to go to the audio homepage,
and then there's some books on MPEG.
These tend to be all of MPEG,
but you'll find a chapter on audio,
and so there's a couple
for your reference.
And that's all I have.
Thanks Schuyler.
And now to something
completely different – a video.
We're going to try and
cover these three questions:
What are they?
What can they do for us?
And what are they going to
do for us in the future?
Well, everybody loves pictures,
and the test of the video projection
is whether we can see the moon
in the upper right-hand corner.
And we can.
That's great.
But they take an awful lot of bits
if you don't have any compression.
Home video telephone, for example,
six megabits just for
home video telephone.
High-definition TV gets you up to one and
a half gigabits – an incredible number
of bits if you can't do compression.
For example, now,
here's what compression can do for us.
For the home video telephone,
we can get compression
ratios of 50 with very,
very high quality,
or push it up to as high as 300 if
we're comfortable with usable quality.
I won't go through all of these,
but down at entertainment
television or high-definition TV,
we can get compression ratios in the
range of 40 or 50 with very high quality,
or even with a little more
for quality that's usable,
something like you're used
to on your cable television.
The current video coding
standards look like this.
And here are the dates in
which they were introduced.
H261, I guess, was one of the first ones
to catch on in a big way,
and it's used even today
in video conferencing.
Internet video conferencing
still uses this a little bit.
MPEG-1 came on in 1992.
That was aimed mostly at compact disks.
Karochi machines use
MPEG-1 almost exclusively.
MPEG-2 was jointly done with the ITU.
ITU gave it this number, H262.
MPEG gave it this – well,
it's got a bigger number, actually,
but everybody calls it MPEG-2.
And that's what's used in
today's digital television,
HDTV, DVD, and personal video recorders.
A whole bunch of things use MPEG-2.
This is probably the most
successful video standard ever.
H263 is an ITU standard, follows on H261.
It's a better video
conferencing standard.
MPEG-4, part two is the video,
came on a few years ago,
aimed at PC and Internet applications.
It's more than a compression standard.
It just has a plethora of things
that it's trying to do with MPEG-4.
And last but not least,
just coming on a few months ago,
is H26 – this, again,
was jointly developed by ITU.
ITU and MPEG.
ITU gave it this number, H264.
MPEG calls it AVC.
And that's a bit of a confusion.
You'll find people
bouncing back and forth.
I tend to call it H264.
David tends to call it AVC.
And different people just
bounce back and forth.
So if you can just plant in your brain,
AVC and H264 are the same.
They're the same animal.
And it's evolving.
A little technology.
I don't know how much
technology to introduce here,
actually.
How many were at the
H.264 session yesterday?
Same time, same place.
Ah, a lot of people.
Well, and some weren't.
Okay, well,
I'll mention a little technology.
Of course, we all like color pictures.
And we know we send color – they come
out of the camera as three components,
red, green, and blue,
and those can be digitized, of course.
But if you just do that,
you end up with a lot of bits.
We don't send the red, green, blue.
We convert that with a linear
transform into luminance
and two chrominance signals.
It's a reversible transform,
but with this transform,
it enables us to subsample
the two chrominance signals.
The chrominance is usually less
samples per picture than the luminance.
A little more technology.
Jargon.
I-frames, P-frames, and B-frames.
Well, what do these mean?
Well, what it means is typically we
don't send the pixels themselves.
We divide the picture
up into small blocks.
I believe this is eight by eight blocks.
It's eight pixels by eight pixels.
Sometimes they're four by four.
And instead of sending the pixels,
we transform those into
transform coefficients.
It's a discrete cosine transform
is what's used by everybody today.
Historically there were other transforms,
but this is what we use.
So we don't send the pixels,
we send transform coefficients.
And iframes means, well,
we just send the transform
coefficients in one frame,
very similar to the way JPEG does.
The coding does not
depend on any other frame.
Now we also use motion compensation.
If we want to send this
block in the current frame,
we try to predict it
from the previous frame.
And since video often has motion,
the previous frame,
the block is in a different position.
So we use that shifted block as
a prediction of the block we're
trying to send in the current frame,
and we send the difference between the
current frame and the previous frame.
If this is an 8x8 block,
we get 64 differences,
we transform the difference,
and send that.
And that's what we call a P-frame.
The motion compensated predicting frame,
it depends on one other frame.
We also use bidirectional
motion compensated prediction.
In this case,
if we wanted to send this block,
we calculate the same motion compensated
prediction in the previous frame,
but we also calculate a
motion compensated prediction
in the future frame.
So we can send this block
in the current frame,
and we send the difference between the
current frame and the previous frame.
And that's what we call a P-frame.
The motion compensated predicting
frame depends on one other frame.
We then calculate the two
differences from the current
frame to the previous frame,
current frame to the future frame,
add up the differences, divide by two,
and send the average.
And that's what's
referred to as a B-frame,
bidirectional motion
compensated predicted frame.
This coding depends on two other frames.
We put it all together,
you get a block diagram
that looks like this.
I won't go through all the components.
Here's a predictor.
Predictor goes into a subtractor.
You calculate the difference,
transform the difference, quantize,
code it, send it off to the transmitter.
A decoder does virtually the same thing.
It calculates a prediction,
but the received signal
is a difference signal,
so that has to be added to the
prediction to get the decoded image.
So that's how all these coders work.
Now an important issue on these standards
is that they specify the bitstream.
They tell you what the bits are,
and they tell you how to decode mostly.
They tell you how to decode those bits.
They do not specify the encoder.
They do not tell you
how to produce the bits.
That's the difference between the
audio and the video standards.
The encoders, in fact,
continue to improve for years
and years and years after
the standard is finalized.
MPEG-2 encoders are still
improving every single year.
MPEG-4 video, part two is video,
there are all kinds of other parts,
has a wide range of bit rates
and a wide range of options.
Now here's the picture we
used to describe MPEG-4.
MPEG-4 was aimed at coding
separate 3D objects,
separate audio objects,
separate video objects,
and to allow those objects to be
coded and transmitted separately
and composed at the receiver,
at the decoder,
to produce the final picture.
The final picture might be
choosable at the transmitter,
might be choosable at the receiver.
I think it's fair to say this vision
is not implemented very much anywhere.
The academics are having
a great time with it,
hasn't really hit the marketplace.
. There are other features
like text to speech,
face and body animation,
wireframe models,
sprite coatings of backgrounds,
just a wide variety of features.
The newest video coding standard,
the one you heard about yesterday,
the one we're introducing
at Apple this week actually,
is the H.264AVC standard.
Much better compression than MPEG-2,
approximately twice as much as
MPEG-2 on the compression side.
So for example, for PC or CD-ROM,
you can use the H.264AVC standard,
and you can also use the
H.264AVC standard for video coding.
. For PC or CD-ROM applications,
which typically MPEG-1 handled,
compression ratio of 55, well,
these compression ratios, as you know,
depend on the quality of the coding,
so this is a range.
55, you can double that over 100.
For normal TV, compression ratios of 60,
figure, double that,
you can get over 100.
Double the number of channels that you
can send on the digital transmission.
For HD, again,
doubling that would mean you could
get double the number of HD pictures
that you can on today's cable.
Now, what's in this H.264 technology?
You heard much of this yesterday,
and I won't go through
these in great detail.
They use a 4x4 transform
instead of an 8x8 transform.
The motion compensation blocks,
instead of all being the same size,
they're all the same size.
. . The motion compensating blocks,
instead of all being the same size,
can have different sizes.
If you're on the edge of an object,
you want to have small
motion compensated blocks.
There's a deblocking filter.
Many of these compression algorithms,
if you really squeeze them down,
you begin to see the 8x8 blocks.
So there's a deblocking filter
that compensates for that.
What else?
There's an intra-prediction.
Instead of coding the
little blocks separately,
they can use predictive
coding to do that.
There's some error resilience techniques.
If you have enough bits,
you can actually send the
pictures several times.
So if one of them doesn't make
it during the transmission,
you can use one of the others.
You don't have to send the whole picture.
You can send pieces of the picture.
Some pieces are more
important than others.
Multiple reference frames.
This coder allows you to use
in your motion compensation a
whole bunch of previous frames,
not just one.
So you can choose which of the
reference frames you want to use.
What's coming up?
Well, in MPEG, in H.264AVC,
an amendment just being worked on now
is called Fidelity Range Extensions.
That's a mouthful.
We typically call it FREXT.
That's a one-syllable acronym.
Perfect.
It allows up to 12 bits per pixel.
Prior to this,
most of these standards used 8.
This 12 may be extended, actually, to 16.
It allows higher color resolution.
Typically, the color resolution has been
subsampled by two in both
horizontal and vertical directions.
The subsampling can be completely
eliminated for professional applications.
It has an optional 8x8 DCT.
On some videos,
the 8x8 DCT works a little
better than the 4x4 DCT,
so they threw in an optional one.
And an alpha channel is
being considered currently.
currently.
Another one that's just getting underway.
This is MPEG21.
Now, you may ask, "How does MPEG come up
with these numbers?" 1,
MPEG2, MPEG4, MPEG7, MPEG21.
The answer says, "We don't know." Right.
We have no idea.
It's a marketing thing, I think.
Scalable video coding.
Scalable video coding has a
checkered history in this business.
MPEG2 had a scalable
video coding profile.
It was never really
implemented as far as we know.
It's a great match for
networking that has multicast.
You know, the multicast IETF mechanisms
for the internet.
Unfortunately, multicast is,
it really isn't everywhere.
That's the problem.
So if you want to do
scalable multicast broadcast,
you may not be able to get everywhere.
So it's not used very much.
MPEG21 is going to give it another
try and we'll see what happens.
H265, that's more or less a placeholder,
actually.
It'll be the follow-on to H264.
At this stage,
it's probably a research effort.
And that's how most of these
video standards come about,
actually.
A research effort starts and then
technology is either adopted or tossed.
And then after quite a number of years,
in the case of MPEG,
it's a little bit more complicated.
But it's a good example of how,
in the case of H264,
the development of the standard
took place with contributions
from lots and lots of people.
The MPEG video standards typically
have more than a couple hundred people
contributing to these standards.
So H265, we have high hopes for.
I'll give it six or seven years, maybe.
Another issue on these standards,
of course, is the processing power
that we have to deal with.
A lot of the ideas are
not particularly new,
but with the incredible processing power
that our chip friends have provided us,
we can now implement these ideas.
So given a few more years,
hopefully the curve will continue
to give us more processing
power in the future and we can
implement a lot of these ideas.
Okay, that in a nutshell is what
video standards are all about.